---
layout: post
title:  Defold release 1.3.2
excerpt: Defold 1.3.2 has been released with a handful of fixes and minor improvements
author: Björn Ritzl
tags: ["release notes"]
---

This release is primarily a bug fix release, but we have also had time to add support for builds targeting Android 12 as well as the ability to create both an APK and AAB in a single build step.


## Release notes

### Engine
__NEW__: __Use Android 12 (API 31) as target API__ ([#5541](https://github.com/defold/defold/issues/5541))
Android target API updated to API level 31 (Android 12). Minimum version of Defold for Android build is 1.2.185.

`AndroidManifest.xml` has changed. __Make sure you copy these changes into your custom manifest if you use one!__


__NEW__: __Add ability to bundle Android in both formats `apk` and `aab` at the same time__ ([#6506](https://github.com/defold/defold/issues/6506))
Added new ability to create both `AAB` and `APK` bundle at the same time. It makes it simpler to prepare bundle for release (`AAB`) and final tests (`APK`) without running bundle process twice. To create both an APK and an AAB specify both bundle formats in a comma separated list:

```
java -jar bob-jar --bundle-format=apk,aab
```

__FIX__: __Fixed issue with mesh vertex buffers not updating properly__ ([#6505](https://github.com/defold/defold/pull/6505))
Under certain circumstances meshes did not update correctly even though the buffers changed. This fix ensures that a mesh is updated when the buffer content changes.

__FIX__: __Moved in-place encrypt and decrypt to dmsdk__ ([#6520](https://github.com/defold/defold/pull/6520))
The Defold SDK has two new functions for performing in-place encrypt and decrypt of a buffer using a key and encryption algorithm:

```cpp
Result Encrypt(Algorithm algo, uint8_t* data, uint32_t datalen, const uint8_t* key, uint32_t keylen)
Result Decrypt(Algorithm algo, uint8_t* data, uint32_t datalen, const uint8_t* key, uint32_t keylen)
```

__FIX__: __Fix possible ANR when OS closes app__ ([#6513](https://github.com/defold/defold/pull/6513))
This fix takes care of the last know source of a category of ANRs related to unloading native code (`android.app.NativeActivity.unloadNativeCode`).

__FIX__: __Component types are deleted before the collections__ ([#6521](https://github.com/defold/defold/issues/6521))
Due to a recent refactor of component code and context ownership there's a risk of a crash during shutdown when using a GUI component. 

__FIX__: __Make sure to copy asset folders as well when creating the Android bundle__ ([#6487](https://github.com/defold/defold/issues/6487))
Some Android dependencies ship additional folders in the `assets` directory. In the case of Helpshift (`com.helpshift:helpshift-sdkx:10.1.0`) there is an `assets/helpshift/` folder containing additional files. The build pipeline incorrectly assumed that everything in `assets` was files. This fix checks each entry in `assets` and in the case of a folder it copies the folder and everything in it to the bundle.


__FIX__: __Support require calls from the global Lua table__ ([#6438](https://github.com/defold/defold/issues/6438))
Lua stores all global functions and variables in the global table identified as `_G`. This table contains all of the global Lua language functions as well as Defold API functions and any user defined global values. The `require()` function is among the global Lua functions and can be used to require Lua modules:

```lua
-- these are calling the same function
local foo = _G.require("foo")
local foo = require("foo")
```

When building a Defold game the build tools scan for calls to `require()` and will include any required Lua module in the build. The build tools did not detect `_G.require()` calls which results in run-time errors when Lua modules were not included in the build. This change adds detection of `_G.require()` calls to the build tools.


__FIX__: __Fix timer triggered in init__ (#6536)[https://github.com/defold/defold/issues/6536]
The timer did not trigger at the correct time if set from the init() lifecycle function of a script. This was caused by recent changes in the engine when improved handling of variable refresh rates and decoupling of physics was introduced.


__FIX__: __Getting flipbook animation for a box node may return an empty hash__ (#6551)[https://github.com/defold/defold/issues/6551]
Fix issue when `gui.get_flipbook()` returns empty string for a box node created in the editor.