---
layout: post
title:  Defold release 1.4.1
excerpt: Defold 1.4.1 has been released.
author: Björn Ritzl
tags: ["release notes"]
---

## Engine
__NEW__: ([#7139](https://github.com/defold/defold/pull/7139)) __Use standard gamepad mapping for unknown gamepads in HTML5__ 
This change adds support for a standard gamepad mapping in html5 builds. The standard gamepad is defined in the `default.gamepads` (in `builtins`) with device name "Standard Gamepad". This mapping will be used for any gamepad that is identified as a standard gamepad in the Gamepad API. 

The standard gamepad mapping is defined as 16 button gamepad with 2 analog sticks with a button layout very similar to a PlayStation or Xbox controller (see the [W3C definition and button layout](https://w3c.github.io/gamepad/#dfn-standard-gamepad) for more information).

__NEW__: ([#248](https://github.com/defold/extender/pull/248)) __Automatically create Android R.java files for all Gradle dependencies__ 
This change automatically adds each resolved Android Gradle dependency containing resources as an extra package when linking resources using `aapt2`. This reduces or completely removes the need to specify `aaptExtraPackages` in `ext.manifest`.

__NEW__: ([#7124](https://github.com/defold/defold/pull/7124)) __resource.set_texture improvements__ 
Added new functionality to the resource.set_texture function - you can now update a specific region of the texture as well as update only a specific mipmap with new data. This is done by setting the new "table" argument values:

```
local header = {
	width = ...,
	height = ...,
	type = ...,
	format = ...,
	x = number, -- New field
	y = number, -- New field
	mipmap = number, -- New field
}
```

__NEW__: ([#7154](https://github.com/defold/defold/pull/7154)) __Create texture resource in runtime__ 
Added a function to create texture resources dynamically in runtime. Use the new function resource.create_texture(path, args) to create a texture, and then go.set to assign it to components or resource properties like any other resource.

__NEW__: ([#7179](https://github.com/defold/defold/pull/7179)) __Added configfile extension functionality to dmSDK__ 
We've added new extension macro `DM_DECLARE_CONFIGFILE_EXTENSION` in `dmsdk/dlib/configfile.h`.
The extension allows extension developers to provide custom properties, or override existin ones.

In order to fully utilize this mechanic, we've created the `sys.get_config_string()`, `sys.get_config_int()` and `sys.get_config_number()` functions. The old `sys.get_config()`is now deprecated, in favor of `sys.get_config_string()`.

__FIX__: ([#7133](https://github.com/defold/defold/pull/7133)) __Remove old `rig.max_instance_count` counter.__ 
Remove old deprecated max counter `rig.max_instance_count` which was the reason of minimum 128 `max_count` for model component.

__FIX__: ([#7143](https://github.com/defold/defold/pull/7143)) __Add serialization nested depth limit to the debugger__ 
Lua debugger table serialization now has a nesting limit of 100 depth levels. Deeper tables will not be serialized and instead will be shown as e.g. `...0x0119a21230`. This also prevents stack overflow exceptions on breakpoints if very deeply nested structures (without circular references) are used.

__FIX__: ([#7155](https://github.com/defold/defold/pull/7155)) __Added opt-in for Lua bytecode deltas__ 
Moved Lua bytecode delta generation behind a bob flag (`--use-lua-bytecode-delta`). The default behavior is now to bundle with full 64 and 32 bit bytecode for multi-architecture builds (primarily on Android). Just like before when bundling for a single architecture only bytecode for that architecture will be included.

__FIX__: ([#7171](https://github.com/defold/defold/pull/7171)) __Fix crash when max sound instances is 0__ 
Fixed a crash when max sound instances is 0 in game.project


## Editor
__NEW__: ([#7158](https://github.com/defold/defold/pull/7158)) __DEFEDIT-7152 Added preference to disable loading of external changes on app focus__ 
* Added checkbox **Load External Changes on App Focus** to the General Preferences page. When disabled, the editor won't scan for external changes when it receives focus. A new menu entry **Load External Changes** will appear in the **File** menu so users can trigger the process manually.
* Moved **Code Editor Font** setting from the General Preferences page to the Code Preferences page.